[ResponseOps][docs] add docs for new mustache lambdas and asJSON for array (#155417)
elastic/kibana: docs/user/alerting/action-variables.asciidoc

[[rule-action-variables]]
== Rule action variables

Alerting rules can use the https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html[Mustache] template syntax

> (`{{variable name}}`) to pass values when its actions run.  Note that "partials" are not supported.

Author: I added that, as the mustache docs reference it, and we don't support them (yet, anyway).  I suspect most customers won't know what they are.  Also I'm waiting for the day a customer asks us how to **use** partials, because they saw it in the doc, and we have to tell them we don't support them.

Since that day hasn't come yet, feels fine to remove it.

> (`{{variable name}}`) to pass values when its actions run.  Note that "partials" are not supported.

Reviewer: Okay! I've removed that sentence via a437eef26c1613a0968ddfeaf46c1fc23e31c753

----

[discrete]
[[parse-hjson-lambda]]
===== ParseHjson

The ParseHjson lambda provides ease-of-use capabilities when constructing JSON objects.  https://hjson.github.io/[Hjson] is a syntax extension to JSON.  It has the following features:

- allows missing and extra trailing commas in arrays and objects
- comments are supported
- property names can be specified without quotes
- property values can be specified without quotes (one per line and no commas)
- de-dent support for leading whitespace in multi-line strings
- also supports legal JSON documents

To use it, surround your Hjson content with `{{#ParseHjson}}your content here{{/ParseHjson}}`.

For example, here's an example template:
 
[source]
----
{{#ParseHjson}}
{
  # add the rule id and name to the JSON document
  ruleId:   "{{rule.id}}"
  ruleName: "{{rule.name}}"
}
{{/ParseHjson}}
----

When rendered, this will generate:
 
[source,json]
----
    {
      "ruleId": "<the rule id is here>",
      "ruleName": "<the rule name is here>"
    }
----

[discrete]
===== FormatDate

The FormatDate lambda provides date formatting capabilities.  Dates can be formatted in an arbitrary time zone and with an arbitrary format string.

> To use it, surround the date and formatting parameters with `{{#FormatDate}}<date and formatting parameters>{{/FormatDate}}`.

Reviewer: Likewise, I think it's clear enough with just an ellipsis:
```suggestion
To use it, surround the date and formatting parameters with `{{#FormatDate}}...{{/FormatDate}}`.
```

> The format of the text passed to the lambda is: `<date>; <time zone>; <date format>`, where semicolons (`;`) separate each parameter.  The `<date>` parameter is required, and the `<time zone>` and `<date format>` parameters are optional.  The default time zone if not provided is `"UTC"`, and the default date format is `"YYYY-MM-DD hh:mma"`.  For example, the following templates all render the same value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format of the text passed to the lambda is: `<date>; <time zone>; <date format>`, where semicolons (`;`) separate each parameter.  The `<date>` parameter is required; the `<time zone>` and `<date format>` parameters are optional.  The default time zone is `"UTC"` and the default date format is `"YYYY-MM-DD hh:mma"`.  For example, the following templates all render the same value:
```

 
[source]
----
    {{#FormatDate}} {{{timestamp}}} {{/FormatDate}}
    {{#FormatDate}} {{{timestamp}}} ; UTC {{/FormatDate}}
    {{#FormatDate}} {{{timestamp}}} ; UTC; YYYY-MM-DD hh:mma {{/FormatDate}}
    {{#FormatDate}} {{{timestamp}}} ; ; YYYY-MM-DD hh:mma {{/FormatDate}}
----

The `<time zone>` parameter must be a valid time zone identifier as listed in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones[TZ database time zone names], such as `"America/New_York"`.

The `<date format>` parameter must be a valid date format string as described in the https://momentjs.com/docs/#/displaying/[Moment `format()` documentation].  For example, the date format  `"YYYY-MM-DD hh:mma"` will render in the following format: `"2023-04-24 11:21pm"`.

> The date value itself should usually be referenced with triple braces, as some characters in date strings may contain values which are escaped, which would prevent them from being parsed as dates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The date value itself should usually be referenced with triple braces since some characters in date strings may contain values which are escaped, which would prevent them from being parsed as dates.
```

[discrete]
[[mustache-examples]]
=== Mustache examples

> Below is a Mustache template for an email action sent from an elasticsearch query rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Mustache template is an example for an email action sent from an {es} query rule:
```

[source]
----

> # {{context.title}}

Reviewer: IMO this looks better with [callouts](https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/verbatim/callouts/) in the codeblock.
```suggestion
# {{context.title}} <1>
```

> {{#FormatDate}} {{{date}}} ; America/New_York {{/FormatDate}}

Reviewer: Ditto
```suggestion
{{#FormatDate}} {{{date}}} ; America/New_York {{/FormatDate}} <2>
```

{{context.conditions}}

> **documents** _[view in Discover]({{{context.link}}})_

Reviewer: Ditto
```suggestion
**documents** _[view in Discover]({{{context.link}}})_ <3>
```

> | provider | action | duration |

Reviewer: Ditto:
```suggestion
| provider | action | duration | <4>
```

| -------- | ------ | -------- |

> {{#context.hits}}{{#_source.event}}| {{provider}} | {{action}} | {{#duration}}{{#EvalMath}} round( {{{duration}}} / 1000 / 1000 / 1000 ) {{/EvalMath}} sec{{/duration}} {{^duration}}-n/a-{{/duration}} |{{/_source.event}}

Reviewer: Unless `n/a` is required, I think it's clearer to spell it out:
```suggestion
{{#context.hits}}{{#_source.event}}| {{provider}} | {{action}} | {{#duration}}{{#EvalMath}} round( {{{duration}}} / 1000 / 1000 / 1000 ) {{/EvalMath}} sec{{/duration}} {{^duration}}not applicable{{/duration}} |{{/_source.event}}
```

Author: "not applicable" is fine!

Reviewer: Since it's used in the screenshot example of the email output, I'll leave it as-is.

{{/context.hits}}
----

> 

Reviewer: To use callouts, you'd put the explanation directly after the codeblock like this:
```suggestion
<1> Renders the value of the `context.title` variable as a level 1 heading.
```

> Notes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Renders the value of the `date` variable as a formatted date in the America/New_York time zone.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Shows examples of `**bold**`, `_italic_`, and `[text](url)` links.
```

> - `# {{context.title}}` will render the value of the `context.title` variable as a level 1 heading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> Shows a table with three columns, with one row per element in the `context.hits` array.
```

> - `{{#FormatDate}} ... {{/FormatDate}}` will render the value of the `date` variable as a formatted date in the America/New_York time zone.

Reviewer: If you accept my callout suggestion, this bullet is no longer required.
```suggestion

```

> - `**documents** _[view in Discover]({{{context.link}}})_` show examples of `**bold**`, `_italic_`, and `[text](url)` links

Reviewer: Ditto.
```suggestion

```

> - The last section is a table with three columns, with one row per element in the `context.hits` array.  From each of those elements, we access the `provider`, `action`, and `duration` fields of the `_source.event` object.  The `duration` field is rendered as a number of seconds, rounded to the nearest second - it's stored as nanoseconds so needs to be divided by a billion to yield seconds.  The duration field is optional, so we use a `{{#duration}} ... {{/duration}}` section to render the duration if it's present, and `-n/a-` if it's not present.

Reviewer: Ditto, this would be appended to the fourth callout. Note the use of "you" instead of "we":
```suggestion
From each of those elements, you can access the `provider`, `action`, and `duration` fields of the `_source.event` object. The `duration` field is rendered as a number of seconds, rounded to the nearest second. It's stored as nanoseconds so it needs to be divided by a billion to yield seconds. The duration field is optional, so you can use a `{{#duration}} ... {{/duration}}` section to render the duration if it's present and show `not applicable` otherwise.
```

> When rendered into Markdown, and then HTML, and viewed in an email client, it will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When rendered into Markdown then HTML and viewed in an email client, it looks like this:
```

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/email-mustache-template-rendered.png[Email template rendered in an email client]

> The template references the following mustache variables:

Reviewer: > The template references the following mustache variables:

Is there a reason for restating these? They already appear in the example codeblock, so I'm unsure why they need to be restated. If it's worthwhile to keep them, I'd suggest putting this (and the subsequent data codeblock) at the beginning of this section. For example, along the lines of "If you have an {es} query rule that provides the following Mustache variables...you can create an email action that uses the following Mustache template..."
